Here's the fact sheet from Plu*Perfect Systems I received today.

                                   Bob Dean, Sysop    12/19/86
                                   Drexel Hill N* RCPM
                                   [215] 623-4040



                   B-a-c-k-g-r-o-u-n-d-e-r ii

          adds new dimension to CP/M 2.2 Z80 Computers


TASK SWITCHING...  lets you run two programs at one time and switch
        between them.  For example, your text editor is available when
        you are using a database manager, spreadsheet, or communications
        program.  With task switching, all of your programs immediately
        become "desktop accessories" for use while running any other task.

BACKGROUND COMMANDS ... let you run BG's built-in commands without
        disturbing your two primary tasks.  You can change disks, get
        file directories, erase, rename, view and print files.  And get
        "help" for a program at any time, even when it's running.

BACKGROUND PRINTING ... (using an optional module) prints any number of
        files automatically while you are running other tasks.  In
        addition,  a program's printer output can be redirected to a
        file.

EXTENSIBLE COMMANDS ... allow programmers to add customized foreground
        and background commands to those already built into BG ii.

TASK-TO-TASK DATA TRANSFERS ... lets you mark and "cut" a region of
        data on the current screen and later "paste" it into another
        program.  There's a built-in notepad for making short notes
        while other programs are running, and you can "dump" the
        current screen to your printer, or to a file.

KEYBOARD MACROS ... allow you to use handy "alternate" and numeric-
        keypad keys to represent complete commands, text, and printer
        control sequences.  You can create and edit new definitions,
        or even automatically record your keystrokes at any time.
        These custom definitions can be saved for use with particular
        programs,a nd automatically loaded, if desired, when the
        programs are rerun.

BACKGROUND CALCULATOR ... lets you do quick calculations in 15 digit
        decimal or hexadecimal arithmetic, save results in memory
        registers, and automatically recall the answer in a program.

NAMED DIRECTORIES ... for easily-remembered drive and user-number areas.

BG ii is a high-performance virtual-memory extension to CP/M.  It works
best with a ram-disk or a hard-disk.  BG ii replaces the CP/M command
processor and requires about 2.75K of additional space (just 0.25K in a
ZCPR3 system).  The virtual-memory file on the disk required about 100K.
BG ii can be instantly removed to restore the original command processor,
should a very large program require more space.

BG ii is compatible with the ZCPR3 command processor concept and
associated high-memory buffers.  Conflicts exist with a very few ZCPR3
applications programs that depart from CP/M standards; we believe they
can be solved by small changes to those programs.

Backgrounder, version ii, is Copyrite 1986 by Plu*Perfect Systems.
 
