           CCP/M 1988-89

           Looking back and looking forward

           It seems fitting that in a year when a movie would kindle interest 
       in "Dead Poets", a user group catering to a "dead" computer operating 
       system should do so well. CCP/M has done well in this past year. Many 
       of our long time members continue active envolvement in the group, even 
       though they often spend much of their time with non-CP/M type systems. 
       We've also added many new people to our membership. This year has seen 
       our group become a Z-System distributor, a developement that added a 
       great deal to the value we can offer our members. The year started with 
       many changes from our previous way of conducting our affairs. For one 
       thing, we took full responiblity for our group's newsletter, a move 
       that eventualy brought us to the inovative disk based format we are 
       enjoying now. We've also established a a degree of dependablity that 
       should continue to bring rewards in the future. One of the best 
       developments of the past year has been a better distribution of the 
       workload amung those doing the behind the scenes chores that are 
       often taken for granted. While we still need to expand this concept of 
       distibutive effort, we've made a start and have begun to see the 
       rewards it can bring.

           I think it's a good time to recognise all those that contributed to 
       CCP/M's success in the past year. While I can't mention each 
       individual's name, it's clear that CCP/M would not have survived, let 
       alone flurish, without the contributions of many individuals. I 
       sincerly thank the officers and appointees that carried out thier 
       responsiblities through out the past year. Here's thanks also to 
       everyone that contributed materials to the newsletter, offered 
       presentations at our meetings or added to our always expanding software 
       library. For everyone that conributed the making CCP/M a better user 
       group, your efforts are very much apreceated.

           While it's clear that there have been many individuals making 
       important contributions to the group over the part year, I, as the 
       current president, belive it's appropriate to bring special recognition 
       to those who made an extrodinary difference thru thier efforts. I had 
       in mind to sellect one person as the first recipiant of the CCP/M 
       president's certificate of appreceation. In fact, I feel that this 
       distinction should be shared by two members this year. Not only are 
       they both worthy of recognition for thier contributions, but, they made 
       many of thier most significant contributions thru a cooperative effort 
       that stands as an example how much can be accomplished by individuals 
       working together toward a common goal. The recipiants of the 1988-89 
       President's certificate of appreciation are Lee R Bradley and James F 
       Taylor. Both of these men have spent many hours over the past year 
       working on various tasks and projects which have had a profound 
       influence on the quality of our user group. While they were certainly 
       not alone in thier willingness to commit themselves to providing 
       service and suport to CCP/M, they did distinguish themselves by the 
       constancy of thier efforts and the varied nature of thier 
       contributions. I'm sure that all the other members of CCP/M will join 
       me in this special thanks to two people that offered so much of their 
       time and effort over the past year. Being able to formalize this common 
       sentiment is one of the true pleasures of having been president this 
       past year.

           With a new year for CCP/M approching, it's a time to look forward 
       to new opertunites and inovations. I hope all the members of CCP/M 
       share my hope that CCP/M can build on the work of this past year, as we 
       had in turn built on early efforts. The future for CCP/M is an open 
       question. There are limitless opitions for the group's direction and 
       character. If the resourcefullness, imagination and dedication of the 
       current membership is an indication, I have every confidence that 
       1989-90 will be a still more interesting and prosperous year for CCP/M.

       BRIAN NALEWAJEK (president CCP/M)
       August 1989

