15-Feb-86 12:30:13-MST,2012;000000000000
Mail-From: KPETERSEN created at 15-Feb-86 12:29:59
Date: Saturday, 15 February 1986  04:01-MST
Message-ID: <KPETERSEN.12183617530.BABYL@SIMTEL20.ARPA>
Sender: "ROSSI J.A." <rossi@NUSC.ARPA>
From: "ROSSI J.A." <rossi@NUSC.ARPA>
Reply-To: ROSSI J.A. <rossi at NUSC.ARPA>
To: info-cpm <info-cpm@AMSAA.ARPA>
Subject:   Access to INFO-CPM@AMSAA & North Star Formats
ReSent-From: KPETERSEN@SIMTEL20.ARPA
ReSent-To: Northstar-users
ReSent-Date: Sat 15 Feb 1986 12:29-MST

     I am LT John Rossi III <ROSSI@NUSC.ARPA>.  I have been reviewing
some of the archives from SIMTEL20 and I was somehow lead to believe
that AMSAA is a clearinghouse for info on CP/M systems.  I have tried
to access AMSAA by way of FTP and TELNET and have found that there is
no ANONYMOUS access.  Question #1 - Are you an interactive
clearinghouse ?.
     Independent of direct access to AMSAA, I would like to know if
you could point me in the direction of a place where I can obtain a
version of the MODEMx program in Northstar DS/DD (360K) format.  I am
currently conducting experimentsat U.S. Navy Subbase,NLON, NSMRL and I
would like to use my old standby N* controller based kluged computer
to handle some of the data.  My communications ports are by old
CompuPro Interfacer I boards so I need sufficient documentationalong
with the program so that I asn patch the appropriate linklages to my
user area.  I need the modem program for communication with a VAX-750
which will be handling most of the data.  Since N* is a hard sectored
format, I realize that I have two options, type in source code, or
find someone who can supply machine readable media.  I would prefer
the later and would be more than happy to pay for the service of
obtaining the software and documentation I need to get this project
moving.  Any advice would be appreciated.

Thank You,

John Rossi III


P.S. I am still new to this network game so If you could, please acknowledge
     receipt of this message.

Thanks Again
25-Feb-86 07:47:49-MST,6757;000000000000
Return-Path: <rossi@nusc.ARPA>
Received: from nusc.ARPA by SIMTEL20.ARPA with TCP; Tue 25 Feb 86 07:47:10-MST
Date: 25 Feb 86 09:48:00 PST
From: "ROSSI J.A." <rossi@nusc.ARPA>
Subject: Thank you, and Help
To: "northstar-users" <northstar-users@simtel20.ARPA>
Reply-To: "ROSSI J.A." <rossi@nusc.ARPA>

Return-Path: <cpmlist@AMSAA.ARPA>
Received: from AMSAA by NUSC.ARPA ; 24 Feb 86 11:05:42 PST
Date:     Mon, 24 Feb 86 10:54:50 EST
From:     Dave Towson (info-cpm-request) <cpmlist@AMSAA.ARPA>
To:       rossi@nusc.ARPA
Subject:  [ROSSI J.A.:  N*, MODEM7 etc replies to ROSSI@NUSC.ARPA]

John - 

     The address "info-cpm-request@amsaa.arpa" is for matters dealing with
the operation of the mailing list (additions, deletions, changes, etc.).
Please send general articles such as this one to "info-cpm@amsaa.arpa" (i.e.,
leave off the "request").


Thanks,

Dave


----- Forwarded message # 1:

Received: from nusc.arpa by AMSAA.ARPA id a004073; 22 Feb 86 12:17 EST
Date: 20 Feb 86 16:27:00 PST
From: "ROSSI J.A." <rossi@nusc.ARPA>
Subject: N*, MODEM7 etc replies to ROSSI@NUSC.ARPA
To: "info-cpm-request" <info-cpm-request@amsaa.ARPA>
Reply-To: "ROSSI J.A." <rossi@nusc.ARPA>


Friends,

Thank all of you who have sent me EMAIL concerning my current problem.  In
regards to the SIMTEL20 archives, through your helpful comments, I have
managed to access and extract many of the ASCII files.  I have snarffed
PIPMODEM and DOC as well as BASMODEM and DOC.  I have also read all the kind
suggestions made by everyone concerned who replied to my inquiry.  I wish
that I could report other successes, however with the information that I
now possess I think I know what questions I should really be asking in order
to get my current problem solved.
1) I still do not know the exact procedure for FTPing BINARY files 
(esp. squeezed files) down to the VAX 780 here at NUSC.  Do i FTP the files
first then unsqueeze (if so how) or do I unsqueez first.  Also, assuming that
I have a MODEM program up and running (My PC-Clone runs MEX as well as PCTALK-3
and Crosstalk) how do I transfer BINARY files (I have been transferring ASCII
files using KERMIT (can it be used for non-ASCII transmission).
2) More related to my original question of communication between computers
in the same room (it was suggested that I implement a NULL-Modem), briefly,
I have a N* based S-100 computer (the only reason I mentioned this in the
first place is because of the 'oddball' 10 hard sector format used by the
system) which uses both CP/M and N* DOS.  The CPU for this system is a
CompuPro Z80, and it is a 64K system.  There are 2 I/O boards in the computer
(one) SSM 3P+S in which the Serial's UART is blown so it is a 3P, and (one)
CompuPro interfacer 1 (2-SIO).  The system was used (in addition to other
things ie. word processing etc) in the lab as a controler and hard storage
device for neurophysiological data which was sent in parallel from a 2 mode
data acquisition system I designed (8 bit-6502, 12 Bit 68000), this data
went through the 24 function parallel lines on the 3P+S.  The CompuPro
interfacer was used for the console and a serial printer.  I have long
since abandoned the printer so I have one vacant SERIAL channel which
can be configured in any way necessary DCE or DTE up to 19200B.  I would
like to use this port as a communications port, both for transmitting
binary and ASCII files to the PC-clone (which by the way, has a V20
8080 emulation program operating it so I can run CP/M applications) so that
I can analyze longer sequences of neurophysiological data (the N* program
I wrote was limited to 32K chunks), and also for generally communicating with
the PC-clone and the outside world for transfer of programs and what not.
The most important thing that must be accomplished (at least in the eyes of
the NAVY) is that I collect and analyze the data.  Therefore, establishing
a system for data transfer between the N* based system and the PC-Clone is
of the highest priority.
Question : Will I need to change the user area patches in the BIOS (CP/M), 
which I wrote so it wouldnt be a problem, or do the MODEM programs access
the ports directly (also If the later is so, is the ample information in
how to set up the port configuration i.e port location #s, etc. included
in whatever documentation comes with the public domain progs)?
Question : In a null-modem arrangement, how should the ports be configured
(i.e., can they both be DCE ports or both be DTE ports with the pins re-
routed in the cable, or should one of the ports be DCE and thge other DTE)?
Question : I really don't know a lot about the innards of the PC-clone
except hrat it appears to be exactly like a PC and therefore the serial
adapter should conform to the DCA type setup.  On the other hand, I do
understand the CompuPro board and I can make it do whatever is necessary
provided I know what that is.  How should the ports be configured?
Question : How many pins in the RS-232 interface do I need to implement
a Null modem?
Question : Does public domain software shch as MODEM7xx operate with a
null modem the same as it does with a real modoe/modem link (I realize the
subtle difference in hoe the ports should be configured may need to be
different in the null modem case as opposed to a real modem case depending
on the nature of hte cable used.
Question : If i set up first for use with a null modem, will I in the future be
able to use the same software/system (minor modifications excepted) to 
communicate with a mainfrane, say, through a real modem.
Question : Is this really worth the effort, or should I just put the S100
system in mothballs and hand enter my data collection routines into the
PC-Clone and use a TECMAR multiline parallel interface to collect the
data directly from the data acquisition system.
Question : If the answer to the last question is affirmative, Is there any
body out there who can transfer N* fiormat disks toa more popular type
of soft sector diskette format (IBM-PC, Osborne, Kaypro, Xerox, Morrow etc) 
(for a service fee, of course) so that I can preserve my data, personal files,
and CP/M software for use with this son of a blue beast?

At any rate, thank you for taking the time to read this letter.  I would
greatly appreciate any ideas that you might be able to provide me with.

Sincerely,
LT John Rossi III
<ROSSI@NUSC.ARPA>

U.S. Mail :  LT John Rossi III
             NSMRL Box 900, Auditory Dept.
             U.S. SubBase, NLON
             Groton, CT  06349

             Voice : (203) 449-4109
             Voice : (203) 848-9536  Home

------

----- End of forwarded messages
------
