Creating a newsletter from a LBR file, or 1001 ways to beat a 
computer with a wet noodle.
by Eric Palm

     Here is my excursion into CP/M with the Atari ST and the 
public domain file "CPMZ80.TOS".  TOS is the Atari equivalent of a 
CP/M COM file.  COM files can't be loaded into the native Atari 
system without the CPMZ80.TOS program running.  It's a nifty 
little emulator, running at a clocked 1 mhz, and taking up only 
32K ram out of the computers memory.  That's not much considering 
I'm using a 2 megabyte system.  The emulator gives you a full 64K 
TPA. My only complaint is that you can't load Z-System.  That's 
for another column I may right in the future.

     Well, back to the newsletter creation this column is all 
about.  Well my first task is to download from a CP/M BBS, such as 
the editors Z-Node (#12).  I then re-boot my computer and select 
and  configure a 360K ramdisk.  I then double click onto my Z80CPM 
emulator from the desktop (which is the GEM standard desktop). And 
insert my utilities disc with my copy of NULU.COM, SCOPY.COM, 
UNCR.COM, TOSCPM.COM, and CPMTOS.COM.

     Step one from the CP/M perspective is to SCOPY file by file 
the formentioned utility programs of my utility disc to the blank 
disc.  I then execute TOSCPM G:filename.lbr a:.  It tells me to 
insert the source and destination discs at the correct times and 
now I have a CP/M disc with all the files I'll need for that 
session.

     This next part is common to all CP/M users who have any 
experience using a modem (as most of you know), it can be a pain 
to transfer at 1200 baud, so by all means upgrade to 2400 baud if 
you haven't already.  NULU is used to extract the *.TZT files from 
the LBR file.  The next steop is to UNCR each file using an 
unambiguous filename. EX: UNCR *.?z? extracts 6 files from the 
LBR.  

     Last and definitely not least is to transfer to a TOS/MSDOS 
disk file by file the TXT files that were UNCR from the LBR file 
using CPMTOS A:*.txt G:.

     I exited the emulator with the CPM command EXIT and return 
to GEM.  I then load up a desktop publishing program called 
CALAMUS and thereby go on to create the window for the columns and 
import the text files.  Doing any text manipulation that may need 
to be done to spice up the document (nothing to effect the 
original documents, just touching up a little.).  Last step is to 
Laser print the document to 14 single sided sheet of 8 1/2" x 11" 
paper and send it to Lee for Photostating.


                                        Peace.....
                                          ....Eric

