
                         GENESIS (Release 2.5)
                   [from Datamation, November, 1973]

      In the beginning the Project Manager created the 
Programming Staff.  The Programming Staff was without form and 
structure.  And the Project Manager said, "Let there be 
Organization." and there was Organization.  And the Project 
Manager saw that Organization was good; and the Project Manager 
separated the workers from the supervisors, and he called the 
supervisors--"Management" and he called the workers--"Exempt".

      And the Project Manager said, "Let there be a mission in 
the midst of the Organization, and let it separate the workers, 
one from another."  And the Project Manager created the mission 
and he called it--"The System".  And the Project Manager 
separated those who were to benefit from The System from those 
who were to build it.  And he called the former--"Users" and he 
called the latter--"Programmers".

     And the Project Manager said, "let all the Programmers in 
the Organization be gathered together into one place, and let a 
Chief Programmer be brought up to lead them."  And it was so.  
And the Project Manager saw that he was competent.

      And the Project Manager said unto the Chief Programmer, 
"Create for me a schedule, so that I may look upon the schedule 
and know the Due Date."  And the Chief Programmer went among his 
staff and consulted with them.  And the staff was divided into 
two parts, one part was called--"Analysts" and the other-- 
"Application Programmers".  And the Analysts went back to their 
desks and estimated, as was their custom.  And it came to pass 
that each Analyst brought his estimate to the Chief Programmer, 
whereupon he collected them, summarized them, and drew a PERT 
Chart.

      And the Chief Programmer went unto the Project Manager and 
presented to him the estimate saying, "It shall take ten months." 
And the Project Manager was not pleased and said, "I have brought 
you up from the depths of the staff;  you have not grasped the 
'Big Picture'".  And the Project Manager hired consultants, and 
authorized overtime, and he said to the Chief Programmer, 
"Behold, see all that I have done!  The Due Date will be in five 
months."  The Chief Programmer was much impressed and went from 
before the Project Manager and proceeded to implement The System.

      And the Chief Programmer sent his Analysts to the Users and 
said, "Let Specifications be written."  And there were meetings, 
and lunches, and telephone calls.  And the Specifications were 
written.  And there was a Payday and the Happy Hour, one month.

      And the Chief Programmer examined the Specifications and 
saw that they were too ambitious.  And he separated the mandatory 
features from the optional features;  and he called the mandatory 
features--"Requirements" and he called the optional features-- 
"Deferred" and the Users called him names.  And the Chief 
Programmer gave the Specifications to the Analysts and said, "Let 
the Requirements be analyzed and let the Files be designed."  And 
it was so.  And the Chief Programmer said, "Let the Software 
Houses put forth their Salesmen, and let us have a Data 
Management System."  And it was so.  The Software Houses brought 
forth all manner of Salesmen who presented their packages, and 
claimed wondrous things for them, each according to his own file 
structure.  And it came to pass that a Data Management System was 
selected;  and the Chief Programmer saw that it was good.  And 
there was a Payday and the Happy Hour, a second month.

      And the Chief Programmer said, "Let the System be divided 
into parts, and let each part be called a 'Module'.  And let 
programming teams be formed and let each be assigned to write a 
Module."  And it was so.  And the Chief Programmer created the 
programming teams with two levels, a greater and a lesser;  and 
he called the greater the "Senior Programmers" and he called the 
lesser the "Junior Programmers".  And he gave the greater 
dominion over the lesser.  And the Chief Programmer saw it was 
good.  And the Junior Programmers saw it differently.  And there 
was a Payday and the Happy Hour, a third month.

      And the Chief Programmer said, "Let the programming be 
started and let much overtime be consumed, for there are but two 
months left."  And the Programmers, both the Senior and the 
Junior, were much afraid, and they strove to please the Chief 
Programmer.  And they flowcharted, and they coded, each in his 
own fashion.  And the Chief Programmer looked upon the work and 
liked it not.  And the Chief Programmer said, "Let there be a 
Standard" and there was a Standard.  And the Programmers looked 
upon the Standard and liked it not.  And there was a Payday and 
the Happy Hour, a fourth month.

      And the Chief Programmer said, "Let there be Progress 
Reports, so we can monitor and control" and there were Progress 
Reports.  And the chief Programmer looked upon the Progress 
Reports and saw that the Due Date was not to be met.  And the 
Chief Programmer arose, pressed his suit, shaved his beard, and 
went unto the Project Manager, and groveled.  And the Chief 
Programmer pointed his fingers, and caused Blame to issue forth 
upon all manner of creatures who sold Hardware and Software.  And 
the Chief Programmer asked for an Extension.

      And the Project Manager was exceedingly angry, and cast 
doubts upon the Chief Programmer's ancestry;  and uttered a 
multitude of threats.  But it came to pass that an Extension was 
granted and the Chief Programmer took the Extension back to the 
programming teams, and there was much rejoicing.  And the 
programming of the modules was completed.  And there was a Payday 
and the Happy Hour, a fifth month.

      And the Chief Programmer said, "Let the Modules be 
integrated, one with another, so that System Testing may begin." 
And it was so.  Two by two the Modules were integrated, one with 
another.  And great difficulties were experienced, and many hours 
of overtime were used, and many cups of coffee were consumed.  
And it came to pass that System Testing was completed.  And there 
was a Payday and the Happy Hour, a sixth month.

      Then the Chief Programmer did go to the Project Manager and 
said unto him, "Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy 
which will come to all the Users for on this day The System is 
completed."  And suddenly there was with them a multitude of 
Users praising the Chief Programmer and saying, "Glory be to The 
System in the highest, but can you make this one small change?"

