WordStar Tip -

When you use the Global Reformatting Command, CTRL QQB, you can control
the speed of formatting between paragraphs by adding a number, 1 through
9.  1 is the fastest.  Also, add a CTRL OH.  This will prevent
hyphen-help from stopping the reformatting for hyphenation.  You can
patch your working copies to Hyphen Help OFF to avoid this problem.

WordStar FIND and REPLACE Commands -

It took me about three months to discover the "Find" and "Find and
Replace" commands.  After my discovery, I was astounded to find out that
several people with Kaypros and WordStar, who process words
professionally and have been doing so longer than I, didn't know about
^QF and ^QA.  I do a lot of list work (mailing labels, basically), and
those two commands have saved me untold hours of tedious labor.  Now,
instead of typing "Nashville, TN 37205" about 800 times, I just type
something like "Na", then type a ^QA with the G, N, and W options, which
tells WordStar to find "Na" and replace it with "Nashville, TN 37205" in
the whole file, looking for whole words only, and do it all without
asking.  Magic!

WordStar Page Numbering -

How can you omit the page number on page 1, but continue on subsequent
pages?  Simply type numbering.  Then, when you see the dashed line
indicating page 2, type .pn which restores page numbering at page 2.
This technique is also handy for continuing the page numbering if you
have a file that is on more than one disk.  In this case, use .pn N,
where N is the next page number.

Hard Carriage Returns -

Several people have been concerned about how to eliminate hard carriage
returns when they are placed at the end of every line of a document.
With WordStar, use the search and replace procedure by using a CTRL QA.
When the program asks you what to find, type CTRL-P CTRL-M followed by
a carriage return.  The program will then ask you what to replace. 
Respond by pressing the SPACE BAR and a carriage return.  When the
machine asks you for options, type the letter G and then press the
carriage return.  The program will find each hard carriage return and
ask you if you want to replace it.  Type Y (or y) for yes, except at the
end of paragraphs.

- Taken from KBYTE - June 1985
