
USE AND CARE OF COMPUTERS
by Editor, Waco KUG, August 1987

(How to clean and maintain your personal computer)

Common sense tells you that there are certain maintenance duties
which are necessary for any computer system.  Routine cleaning,
testing, and preventive maintenance can significantly reduce down
time and costly repairs.  This month we will start a series of
articles on routine preventive maintenance procedures which even
non-technical users can perform to keep their systems up and
running at the peak of performance.


PART I: KEYBOARD

COVERS AND CLEANLINESS

Cleanliness is next to Godliness according to the old adage.  In
computers, this cannot be stressed too much.  A clean working
environment is critical for any computer.  This is especially
true if the computer is crucial for daily business operations or
for critical data storage and retrieval operations.  A dirty
drive head or dusty contacts on a keyboard can result in poor
data transmission or, worse, inaccurate data storage.  One area
where cleanliness is often neglected is on the computer's main
source of data input, the keyboard.

The Kaypro keyboard is the principal source of data input for the
system.  Older Kaypro keyboards are noted as being rugged and
durable.  But they also need periodic cleaning to retain their
optimum performance.

Here's one way to clean a keyboard.  The tools you will need
include some surgical strength alcohol (70% concentration or
greater) and several cotton swabs (such as Q-tips).

  1.  Power down your system.  It is best to switch off at the
back or turn off the power strip (if you have one), but leave the
system plugged into the wall.  This will maintain your grounding
and will reduce static electricity problems.

  2.  You should remove any templates or help notes you have on
your keyboard, such as Keyborders, Kleertex templates, or keypad
overlays.

  3.  Moisten the end of a swab with alcohol.  The swab should be
damp not drippy.

  4.  Gently, with slight pressure, move the swab between the
rows of keys on the keyboard, keypad, and cursor key areas. 
Change swabs often if dirt and gunk accumulate.  Do not push the
dirt and gunk into the keyboard, but rather lift the swab up and
away as the grime accumulates.

  5.  Next, following the step 4 procedure, clean between keys on
each row.  Take care to change swabs as the dirt accumulates.

  6.  Check to see that all dirt and gunk is cleaned from around
the keys.  Remove any excess or residual material found.  

  7.  Let the keyboard dry for 5 minutes prior to use.  It should
be dry as you finish, but just in case you missed a drip or two
of alcohol, it is better to be safe than sorry.

This should have left you with a clean keyboard free of dust,
dirt and grime.  A gentle polish with a clean, lint-free rag or
cloth across the top of the keys should be all that remains to be
done.

Key cleaning is not the only routine maintenance item which
keyboards need.  Adjustments to screws is particularly important
on the portable Kaypro series computers.  The screws on the sides
of the old K-2, K-4, and newer K-1 computers sometimes loosen
over time.  This could result in a dropped keyboard and a big
repair bill.  To tighten these screws, you need a small Phillips
head screwdriver.  Tighten the screws until they are hand tight. 
Do not over tighten, as the plastic latch might crack or break. 
The latch points on the main case  should also be tightened at
this time using the same procedure.  It is best to tighten both
the latches and latch points at the same time to ensure proper
security of the keyboard in transportation.

How often should you do this type of maintenance?  It really
depends on how much you use your computer.  Every two months on
keyboard cleaning and every six months on screw tightening is
about average.  We hope that these tips will help you KEEP 'EM
KAYPROING!!
