
			 Steve Ciarcia's

		C i r c u i t C e l l a r  I N K

		   Microcomputer Applications

	   "Practical Applications for the Real World"

Looking for unique hardware, clever software, project support,
and techniques and technologies? Then Circuit Cellar INK is for
you. Future issues to include articles on:

	o Video Biofeedback		o Stepper Motors
	o 80386 Computer		o Home Control
	o Print Spooler 		o Interfacing
	o Test Equipment		o Video Recognition
	o Satellite Photos		o Multitasking

Premier Issue:	January 1988



A 1-year (6-issue) charter subscription costs only $14.95. To
start your subscription, send check; money order; or Visa,
MasterCard, or American Express number (with expiration date and
signature) to:

			 Circuit Cellar INK
			 P.O. Box 3378
			 Wallingford, CT  06494

or call (203) 875-2199.

(Canada/Mexico, please add $3 for surface mail, $12 for airmail.
All other foreign countries, please add $12 for airmail.
U.S. funds only.)


Msg #8490 posted 08/24/87  by Harv Weiner
To: ALL USERS	  About: Circuit Cellar Ink (48 lines)


Dear Circuit Cellar BBS User:

We are starting a new publishing medium to supplement Steve
Ciarcia's cur-rent projects in BYTE Magazine. This new bi-monthly
publication is called CIRCUIT CELLAR INK - MICROCOMPUTER HARDWARE
APPLICATIONS. The purpose of this letter is to see if you are
interested in writing for it.

In order for you to appreciate the kinds of articles we need, let
me give you some background.

The early days of microcomputing were truly exciting times.
Magazines, such as BYTE and Kilobaud, and user group newsletters
were filled with articles describing the basic techniques of
microcomputing. Subjects ranged from expanding memory, power
supply construction, disk drive and cassette interfaces, and even
the design of whole computers. Commercial products were scarce,
and only a special breed of electronics enthusiast had enough of
the "right stuff" to put it all together into something
functional.

As personal microcomputing became more popular, commercial
equipment pro-liferated, and it became cheaper to buy than to
build.	This created a group of "appliance operators" with little
knowledge of electronics or computer fundamentals.

Computer magazines redirected a lot of their editorial content
from hardware construction articles to reviews of business-
oriented equipment and system software in hopes of attracting
high advertising revenues from these new aggressive
manufacturers. The end result is that hardware builders
constantly face a losing battle for editorial coverage when
pitted against a readership full of appliance buyers.

We feel that the computer experimenter is alive and well and we
would like to return to the best part of those early days, albeit
at today's much higher technical level. We feel there is a need
for a publication that amplifies and supports Steve's efforts in
BYTE with additional novel hardware and software applications. We
feel that you might be someone who can relate to this era and
would like to make a contribution.

This is not a solicitation for money. We already know there is a
vast subscriber base ready for anything Steve Ciarcia publishes.
Instead, this is a call to arms to join with others in creating a
special microcomputing oasis for technically proficient
experimenters far away from the influence of advertising or
special interests.

CIRCUIT CELLAR INK will premiere with 24 pages of practical
articles and reader interaction with no advertising. The goal is
to inform, not to sell. Articles can be machine-specific or not,
and should generally encompass one or more of the following
topics:

General technology		 Various types of control systems
Sensors 			 Data Acquisition, data logging, etc.
PAL programmer			 Stepper Motors
IBM PC interfaces		 BCC52 and SB180 expansion peripherals
Real world interfacing		 Single board computers or controllers
Smart house applications	 Software to run all of the above
Remote sensing or control	 Tutorials on communications protocols
Any video devices		 Descriptive applications



Here is your chance to describe your special project to others
who will appreciate, understand, critique, and enhance it to the
mutual benefit of all. What about that project that you would
love to build "if only I had the time?" An article for CIRCUIT
CELLAR INK could be the motivation to complete, publish, and get
paid for it.

We will work with you in formulating your ideas and writing your
articles. We don't expect you to submit a perfectly composed
manuscript, and we will edit as necessary. Article lengths are
unlimited and will be paid at the rate of $50 per published page.
Longer articles will be serialized as necessary.

If you would like to participate in CIRCUIT CELLAR INK, please
submit a letter describing any project that you wish to
contribute. We will be happy to evaluate and discuss it with you.

We hope that you will view this as an opportunity to contribute
something useful to the community of experimenters and
professionals who have raised microcomputing to its present
advanced state.

Please contact me here via private message or directly by US
mail. We look forward to hearing from you.

Harv Weiner
Microservices
67 Scott Drive
South Windsor, CT  06074
