DATABASE PROGRAMS: PICK THE ONE THAT SUITS YOU
by Bob Follmer, KUGOR, May 1987

(A general look at database programs)

Information storage with databases is something that we
invariably get around to exploring.  But I did not know, until I
started to read about them, that there is more than one type of
database to be concerned about.  In fact, not only is there more
than one type, in actuality there are three types of database
programs.

First the definition which applies to all:  a database management
program stores, sorts, and retrieves specific information.

When you start looking around the marketplace, as I did, you will
find that there are programs that either will or will not handle
words in the reports you might wish to keep and retrieve the
precise way you want.  Certain programs can only handle numbers,
but do not do calculations.  Some do all three, that is, handle
words, numbers and calculations.  Generally, the more expensive a
program is, the more complex the tasks the program can do.  There
is always an exception or two to this rule, however.

Basically, there are three types of database programs.  The first
of these are the flat-file types.  These programs only store,
organize and then output, in a sequenced manner, the information. 
An excellent example of this kind of program is that of a mailing
list...it can be sorted by name, city, and/or zip code sequence.

Another example would be a telephone list, Christmas card list,
or personal names and addresses you would use in business, or at
home.  The second type of program is the relational database. 
This program allows you to link two or more files together with a
common field that the user can predetermine.

The third type of database is the programmable database.  This
will allow you to structure the database so that information can
be manipulated in any manner that you desire.  You can set limits
on the fields, reports, and other data in many ways, thereby
making the data more manageable for your particular needs.

Borderlines tend to become somewhat fuzzy when attempting to cite
specific examples of various database software.  Two products of
the greatest interest to Kaypro users are Perfect Filer and
dBaseII.  The latter is definitely in the third, the
programmable, category.  Perfect Filer, on the other hand, is a
list manager of the first kind without equal.  It provides for
some limited degree of relational operators, too, qualifying it
to bridge into the second category.  The programming power
inherent in dBaseII, however, once learned, offers the user total
mastery over any kind of data.

Next month I hope to explore at closer range the disadvantages
and advantages of the different types of database programs.
