BDSCPAT.LBR   There is a bug in BDS C 1.6 and BDS Z 2.0 that causes the system to crash under certain conditions during the second pass of a compile. Here's a fix.
C128-XGR.LBR  C128-XGR.LBR contains a new Z3 Termcap for the Commodore 128 with C128 line graphics. Programs like ZDT12+ will print line graphic boxes. Underline, blink and reverse attributes are also available. The 50 ms CL delay was removed, since the 128 doesn't seem to need it. Randy Winchester, 9/22/92.
C128TCAP.LBR  An extended TCAP for the C-128, this implements many of the extended functions, including simple ASCII characters for the graphics. The TCSRC13-generated source file has the labels CM:, RC: and GE: changed, since RMAC doesn't like them.
CLKMNT11.LBR  Are you tired of having to manually change the year on your Kenmore clock every January 1st, or fix the day-of-the-week after the 29th of February? CLOCKMNT eliminates both these annoyances. All you have to do is run it when you start up your system, or just after midnight each day on your BBS. The base address of the clock may be changed as required. Version 1.1 runs independently of DOS. See CLOCKMNT.Z80 for details.
CLOCK22.LBR   A program to set/read the MM58167 clock chip used by the Kenmore clock and the Anapro or CDR Super RAM H89 clock for the H89. Adjusts the clock for leap year and Daylight Savings Time. Use the CFG file to set the base port. Under ZCPR3 has option to show elapsed time or if an H19 terminal put time on the 25th line(Heath/ANSI mode). May work for other terminals (use CFG file). Biff Bueffel 3/24/93
CMP30.LBR     This program compares two text or two binary files. It displays differences in hex and in character format. You may advance either file by a single byte or attempt to resynchronize the files based on a string. Runs under both CP/M and Z-System. Written in BDS Z. - Lee Bradley - 11/25/92
CODER2.LBR    Coder is an encryption program which will encode an ASCII file, making it unreadable to all except those with the proper pass-code. The use for such a program? Perhaps you keep a personal journal on your computer which may contain items of a very personal or embarrassing nature. Maybe you have a need for truly 'private' E-Mail. In general, good for any item you wish to remain private or share only with selected others.
COMM122.LBR   GREAT X/Y/ZMODEM and ANSI/VT52/TVI950 terminal emulator from Germany for Z3PLUS ONLY. The docs and the menus are in German, but it is very easy to use. Includes all of the above and popup windows in just over 25k. Installable with ZCNFG (the CFG file is in English) U/L by Brian Moore, 01/03/93
CON20.LBR     Joe Wright's very fast file concatenation program. Nothing fancy, but FAST!! Not a Z utility.
CONCTRL.LBR   Another approach to throttling the screen output of ZCPR3 systems, concocted some time in 1986, released September 7, 1990. U/L by Bruce Morgen 09/07/90
CPMT-PCP.NUM  Phone numbers for several boards that originated CP/M-Tech echo messages that should be reachable via PC Pursuit. I called some of them and at least a modem answered. I didn't go any further though. Larry Schnitger
CPMT0315.LBR  Several CP/M-Tech echo capture sessions dated Mar 10 to 15.
CPMT0322.LBR  CP/M-Tech echo sessions captured Mar 16-22.
CPMT0329.LBR  CP/M-Tech echo messages captured Mar 23-29 from the BCS Commodore/ Amiga/Hypermedia BBS (617) 729-7340.
CPMUNARJ.ARK  Official release version of Paul Hunt's CP/M program to handle .ARJ files. Also included is DARJ to display the complete directory of an ARJ, as well as the DOC's for both.
CPROT.LBR     CPROT is a simple utility for use in debugging programs such as operating system modules and type 3 Z system utilities which must be protected from overlay by a debugger. CPROT creates "protected" memory above a specifed address by creating a double jump to CP/M DOS starting with the DOS jump at 05h. The jump vector at 06h addresses a jump to DOS at a user specified address. CPROT makes several checks to prevent overwriting op sys or itself. Sources included
CRCBLD14.LBR  I've used this utility for a long time to write SIG/M-type catalog files to my archival disks, but it was never released. Possibly somebody else will find it useful, so here it is. Based on SIG/M's CRCBUILD, this ZCPR3 version recognizes DU and DIR specs, obtains the disk number automatically from the disk label (if one exists), sets the error flag, and is compatible with automatic CRC checking using CRCZ.
CRR0150A.ZIP  CRR is the CP/M offline reader for use anywhere XRS might be used on an MSDOS machine. It allows you to download messages from a conformin QBBS, RemoteAccess or SuperBBS Fidonet bulletin board. It will work a with QWK mail packers. In order to use this software you will need an archiving program (eg. ARK or ARC), an archive extractor (eg. UNARC), and a text editor (eg. VDE or ZDE).
CTLCV11B.LBR  CTRLCVT is a filter which takes files with control characters represented as ^C, ^M, etc., and changes the two character sequence into a bonafide control character. As an improvement to CTLCV10A, this version will take advantage of ZCPR 3.3's extended error handling capability, telling the handler what went wrong.
DATA17.LBR    This is a "Poor Man's Database Management System." It supports all traditional features of a database management system including sort, print, zap, search, change, define, list etc. You can even password protect your data. Written in MBASIC and compiled with BASCOM. This release fixes a bug pointed out by Mike Finn, adds several new features and corrects several problems. - Lee Bradley - 12/06/92
DATEFN11.LBR  DATEFN (Dated Filename) is a simple ZCPR3 utility that reads the DOS clock and creates or optionally deletes an empty label file with the current date as the filename. The filename date format may be configured with ZCNFG as ?ddMMMyy.typ or mm/dd/yy.typ. Useful in backup aliases to create and remove label filenames automatically indicating the date of the last disk backup or as a dated library file entry. See DATEFN11.HZP.
DATENULL.ARK  This is an RSX that adds a DOS function to CP/M-Plus that allows limited setting of file date stamps. This is a first cut and needs further development.
DAY10.LBR     No description available.
DIALER.LBR    DIALER is a simple Z-System utility that allows your computer and Hayes-compatible modem to dial your voice telephone calls. It's particularly helpful for scripting your way through banking and other touch-tone based response systems, but could be combined with other Z-System tools to implement a phone number directory, among other potential uses. Type 3 (@100h) and Type 4 versions included, both well under 2K.
DIF13.LBR     Compares two text files for differences and offers several forms of output via command line options and versatile redirected output. The ZCPR3 program error flag is set on error or if the two files do not match. DIF should run fine under vanilla CP/M, but piping is available only under ZCPR3. Version 1.3 corrects bug in LST: and NUL: output redirection.
DIO21.LBR     A revised DIO package for the Z version of BDS C. Works like the old one, but adds additional Unix-like redirected output options, including appending with ">>", output to printer or bit-bucket, and piping that will use all the Z resources, including the path, ARUNZ, and LX. All but piping still works under vanilla CP/M.
DSB8100.INF   Product description for a new 64180-based computer system. Please read it and respond to Davidge and to me if you find it of interest to you. Joe Wright, Alpha Systems.
DSKNUM15.LBR  DSKNUM creates consecutively numbered disk labels (null files) for use by the most popular disk cataloging programs, such as MCAT, NCAT, and FATCAT. The last number used is stored internally so you don't have to remember where you left off. Requires ZCPR 3.3 or higher. Version 1.5 adds ability to use lower-case disk labels. Type-3 version included.
DSTATS12.LBR  ZCPR3 disk/user statistics utility displays maximum directory entries, block size, disk capacity, allocated and free space, and a list of active user areas. For each active user area, it displays any label filename found (-LABEL), the number of files, directory entries and disk space used, and summarizes the total number of files, directory entries and disk free space. Except under Z3PLUS, a disk allocation bitmap may be displayed. See DSTATS12.NZW/HZP.
ELAPSE11.LBR  ZCPR33+ Type 3 (at 8000h) Ampro LB SmartWatch elapsed time utility can measure and display time elapsed between invocation with the 'S' option (save current time to Registers 24-31) and invocation with no option (display current date/time plus elapsed time) to hundredths of a second in the form: Elapsed time: 00:00:00.00 Vers 1.1 adds CFG file for configuration of starting Register. See ELAPSE11.HLP U/L by Terry Hazen, 12/29/92
ENTRPRS2.LBR  This .lbr contains two files describing the modification of Kaypro CP/M computers to run a 22 mb hard drive, the first file gives the complete method for a Kaypro 10 or floppy machines. The second file contains additional thoughts based on experiences modifying Kaypro 2 and Kaypro 4 computers.
FILES.PCB     
FILESZ14.LBR  Shows file size in records, pages, and kilobytes. Accepts an ambiguous file specification, and is useful for patching and saving, satisfying your curiosity, or watching your COM file grow as you add enhancements. For ZCPR3 or vanilla CP/M. v1.4 has new options, enhancements, and ZCNFG configuration. Still 1K.
FIXT0D.LBR    Fix up checksums in DateStamper !!!TIME&.DAT file. This utility recomputes the checksum for each record, and writes a corrected value if necessary, reporting any changes. Run this on a drive that has a damaged !!!TIME&.DAT file to restore the file to operation. Does not alter the dates -- if they require fixing, use DATSWEEP or another utility to reset dates/times.
FLIFE12.LBR   No description available.
FLIFE13.LBR   A version of the Game of Life, written by Jim Petersen in 1985, and upgraded to Z-System by Biff Bueffel. An extended tcap is desirable, but not required. Will run under plain CP/M if properly installed with TCSELECT. Version 1.3 includes some additional features, fixes some bugs, and adds some options configurable with ZCNFG.
FSPLIT10.LBR  A ZCPR3 utility that splits a large file into several smaller ones by record count, by line count, or at a marker character within the file. Options for splitting text files only at the end of a line or object (binary) files on record boundaries. Under ZDDOS and ZSDOS create date stamps are transferred to the new files.
GOTOLINE.LBR  A tiny macro for ZMATE to put your cursor on a specific line number. This should be one of your permanent macros if you ever edit source code.
GST03.LBR     Graphic Script Tools, version 0.3. This is an updated release for VLIB4D of Dave Ramsey's tools to exploit the extended TCAP. This allows the Z-System user to make user of graphics features in ARUNZ and ZEX scripts. Bob Dean July 5, 1990
HGENSCSI.LBR  Ampro LB/Z80 improved HGEN and SCSIBOOT EPROM. Allows automatic bootup from non generic SCSI/SASI controllers (such as Xebec 1410 and DTC510) without first booting from floppy.
I2YB-1.AYM    I2YB-1.ASM is an IMP 2.xx overlay for the 9 or 12Mhz YASBEC. simply, it is a re- engineered I218-4.ASM overlay for the SB-180, with all of the 6Mhz code stripped out, and minor cosmetic repairs to the code. Use this overlay's Divisors, when adapting BYE 5.xx for use with the YASBEC as well.. (Yes, it HAS been done!)
ITOZ14.LBR    A major rewrite of Robert Doolittle's extended Intel to Zilog translator. It's now a ZCPR3 utility with a completely new user interface that knows about DU and DIR specs, error and quiet flags, etc., but also runs under vanilla CP/M. ZSDOS create dates preserved. No longer warm boots. ZCNFG configuration. Includes HLP-type documentation and utility to add pseudo-ops and macro names that would otherwise be unrecognized.
JTHLIB14.LBR  Custom routines originally developed for use in REMIND and ZP fill somewhat special purpose needs by doing things slightly differently than the corresponding standard library routines or by providing new services that I found useful and worth sharing. Vers 1.4 adds a new routine that allows a default du:fn.ft spec to be modified by command line tokens and drops routines now included in VLIB. See JTHLIB14.HZP.
JUST13.LBR    A ZCPR3 version of Irv Hoff's utility to justify ASCII and WordStar text files, with many new features. It is fast, easy to use, and produces even margins by a unique fill method that produces handsome documents. Full command line operation, DU support, error flag setting, quiet mode, transfers create date under ZSDOS, ZCNFG configuration. Version 1.3 fixes a bug and adds a display option.
KEYMAP.LBR    This program allows terminals without function keys to act as if they have many. A control key, followed by any other key, generates an arbitrary input string. Must be assembled with appropriate load addr (inside iop), then linked with syslib. -J. Glomph Black 18 Dec. 1987
LASTON10.LBR  Beta versions of 2 new RCP/M utilities. Initially intended for PBBS Systems running BYE510 (require BYE510 for BYEBDOS calls), but can easily be modified for other BBSs. Complete SOURCE code will be released after initial 'bug-report' period. Please try them and report both positive and negative feedback. Thanks... [Holly Park RCP/M (201) 757-1491 2400 baud and still PC-Pursuit.]
LCS10.LBR     If you regularly use an MS-DOS machine, this ZCPR3 utility may make the transition more comfortable. It loads character sets to Wyse 60 and Televideo 965 terminals, including a Roman font similar to that on MS-DOS machines and a Courier font somewhat easier to read than the native one. Provision has been made for a user-defined font for those who want to design their own.
LEXICON.LST   
LEXICON.LZT   Humorous definitions of computer terms
LHH12.LBR     Utility for displaying ZCPR3 HLP files, which may be stand-alone or within libraries, and may be LZH-crunched or uncompressed (works like LBRHLP does for GEL-crunched and squeezed files). Version 1.2 has a couple of new navigation commands and adds help file documentation.
LIST10.LBR    Sends files, unaltered, to the CP/M LST device. No extra formfeeds or resets are sent. The printer receives only the contents of the specified file. The only available option is "G" (graphics mode), which will cause LIST to ignore the CP/M end-of-file character (^Z).
LOGMAKE3.LBR  Log Maker is a 'chat sript' production utility to be used with the telecommunications program QTERM and any modem using the 'AT' command set. Features: Auto Step Down baud rate adjust (like IMP), 'Super Fast' re-dial of busy numbers for quick access to busy systems, extended scripts for 'Auto Login' to the dialed system and 'Auto Abort' of numbers that don't answer or are answered by voice.
LT31.LBR      Type normal, LZH-encoded, crunched or squeezed files - whether standalone or in a .LBR. If wheel is on, can also easily extract any/all files, and uncrunch and/or unsqueeze at the same time. Version 3.0 incorporated Version 2.0 of LZH encoding; version 3.1 corrects a bug in version 30 (and probably all versions back to 25) that prevented LT from accepting USER specifications as a SOURCE of data.
MAKE.ARC      MAKE is a powerful utility for CP/M-3. MAKE is compatible with Microsoft's MAKE utility for the IBM PC. It allows for conditional execution of commands depending on date&time stamps of the files concerned. It recognizes the CP/M-3 Error Flag and stops when that flag is set. It also uses the CP/M-3 Drive Search Chain to search for source files.
MAKLIB12.LBR  AUTOMATED LBR-builder for DateStamper/ZSDOS users. ZFILER/ARUNZ scripts crunch "comment text" into files, insert into LBR, preserve all datestamps. Uses ZFILER's group macro feature. Tag files you want in LBR, enter LBR name, sit back and watch. Scripts limit "comment" to exactly 19 characters, maximum allowed by LDIR-B. Target LBR can previously exist or not. Nice display. V1.2: fix to ERASE.COM, optional rename, long essay re ZEX. -- Rick Charnes
MARKSALE.TXT  List of computer hardware and software for sale.
MDMPRT03.TXT  
MDMPRT03.TZT  Specifications for the XMODEM protocol. Uploaded for Hal Bower.
MEX-MYZ1.LBR  This library contains a copy of Ron Fowler's MEX (Modem EXecutive) which runs under the MYZ80 emulator on an IBM PC. The port and dialer overlays, sample phone and key files, documentation and help files are included.
MOEC28.LST    
MOEC28.LZT    No description available.
MORE12.LBR    MORE pages text files and optionally numbers lines. It also offers several forms of input and output, including ambiguous filenames, redirection, and piping. The ZCPR3 program error flag is set on error. MORE should run fine under vanilla CP/M, but piping is available only under ZCPR3. Version 1.2 corrects bug in LST: and NUL: output redirection.
MOUSE-DO.LBR  Documentation, help, articles etc. on the Mouse language.
MOUSE-EX.LBR  Example Mouse program source code.
MOUSE-PS.LBR  This library contains the Pascal source code for the Mouse interpreter. This is Turbo Pascal version 2.0 for CP/M 80.
MOUSE-ZS.LBR  This library contains the Z80 macro assembly language source code for the Mouse interpreter.
MYZ80-1.UYD   This is a revision of a recently upload article (which may be deleted). It contains what I've recently learned from Tom Mannion and Howard Goldstein about how to write AUTOEXEC/CONFIGSYS.YECHH files as well as a lot of stuff about MYZ80, Z System and 4DOS. I am thoroughly enjoying my 486/50 and am leaving you this FOR file calling with MEX at 2400 baud from it. That's a CP/M MEX, not MEX -Plus. Enjoy! - Lee Bradley
MYZ80111.ZIP  Latest demonstration version of the MYZ80 Z80 emulator for AT class PC's by Simeon Cran. Changes in this version include improved terminal emulation, better control of screen colors, improved disk performance under CP/M 3 and several bug fixes. Released 4/27/93.
MYZ80CLK.LBR  Quicky ZSDOS/ZDDOS clock driver for MYZ80. See notes in source code.
MYZ80COM.TXT  
MYZ80COM.TZT  A message from Simeon Cran, author of MYZ80, with information about accessing PC COM ports via MYZ80. This message was originally captured from the CPMTECH echo and uploaded to Z-Node #12 by Russell Boyce.
NEWBAS12.LBR  dBase II overlay options allow skipping date question and sign-on, add INKEY function, permit loading overlay files from an alternate drive, and several other mods. Under Z-system or CP/M-Plus, dBase can be called from any drive on your system. Version 1.2 fixes several bugs and adds a few improvements. Now in Zilog mnemonics.
NEWCFG.LBR    Contains new CFG files for ZCNFG20, ZMAC, and ZML16. Previous versions contained a benign error that is now detected by ZCNFG20. Earlier versions should be discarded and replaced by these downward compatible files. Al Hawley, Ladera Z-Node (central) 09/20/91
NKYCLK03.LBR  NuKeyClock is a utility to load the current date/time from internal clock to the NuKey IOP buffer so the time or date string is available as a macro. V. 0.3 corrects a bug in earlier release.
NZDEC23D.LBR  Extended TCAP based upon VLIB4D, this version updated to add hashed block and full block graphics characters (full block uses hashed block too). Now fully compatible with Gene Pizzetta's DIRBAR and GREET10, which requires that every graphics character be defined. Bob Dean 11/6/90
OE17.LBR      A ZCPR3 utility that prints the odd- or even numbered pages of NewWord and WordStar files for two-sided documents. Accepts a list of files and sets the program error flag on error. Version 1.7 handles both Epson FX and LQ printer drivers. Although not tested, OE should also work with MX and RX drivers.
ONPACK.LBR    Source code release of the ONCALC and ONADD programs developed by Ron (MEX) Fowler for the ON! Computer in 1986 and 1987. Released with permission of Oneac Corp. and NightOwl Software. Should work as-is on any Z-System computer with an ADM3A-compatible CON: device -- this big category includes Kaypros, Televideo and Wyse terminals, and many more. Full terminal independence would be relatively easy to implement with VLIB. November 22, 1990
ORD-V303.SUS  
ORDER.LBR     A tiny (under 3K!), very simple and generic ZCPR3/DateStamper program for order entry in a small mail-order or phone-order business. Creates a printed order as well as appending all data to a master order file on disk. Currently does no arithmetic or data checking, with some additional work this stuff could probably be crammed into it without exceeding 4K -- any takers? From 1988, released September 7, 1990. U/L by Bruce Morgen 09/07/90
ORDER.SZS     File containing an order form and product listing for the Z-System Software Update Service (ZSUS) as of Vol. 3, Disk 3.
PARMLIB1.LBR  In answer to Jay Sage's call for more Z80 library functions, PARMLIB performs several of elemental functions to aid in the frequent task of parsing the CP/M command line. Several generalized routines are also included. For examples of use, see my file ZLT13A.LBR. - Carson Wilson
PART35.LBR    This library can be used to partition a Apple Prodos disk into a hybrid Apple/CPM disk if you are useing Steve Hirsh's 3.5 unidisk driver.
PASSWORD.LBR  Nice password program. Can be used in regular CP/M or on a ZCPR3 multiple command line. Does not show keystrokes when you enter a password.
PCPIFILE.LST  
PCPIFILE.LZT  Catalog of PCPI Applicard-oriented files on GEnie. -Bill Tishey
PIPRSX.ARC    PIPRSX is an extension for CP/M-3 PIP. When attached to PIP via GENCOM, it enables PIP to copy files with their byte count value and their archive attribute. It also copies the update date&time stamp to the destination, where it becomes the create and update date&time stamps. However, this won't work with interrupt-driven real time clocks. Last but not least, you may now use DU: specification with every filename you enter.
PMAUTOAE.OBJ  PMARC is a very fast and highly efficient ARChiver for CP/M. The fil PMAUTOAE.COM is a self-extracting ARChive containing PMARC, PMEXT (fo extracting files from PMArchives), PMEXE (generates self-extracting programs that will load into memory and execute), PMSFX for making self-extracting PMArchives, and PMCAT for performing maintenance on PMArchives. This set of utilities rates *****! Highly recommended!
RAMFIX.LBR    This is a collection of three programs to help with possible problems on the SB180(FX) RAM disk. 6 Mar 88
RCOM10.LBR    No description available.
RELDMP.MAC    
RELDMP.MZC    Dump REL file disassembly to printer
REMIND19.LBR  ZCPR3 + DOS_clock appointment reminder utility displays and can print a calendar for the current month, and a sorted and paged list of dated appointment reminder lines with optional time entries, from a text datafile, starting with any currently dated reminders and including upcoming reminders for the current month, a specified month or all upcoming reminders. Uses language-dependent message text overlay. V1.9 improves datafile parsing. See REMIND19.HZP.
REVFN11.LBR   REVFN reverses the case of a filename, making it upper-case if it's lower, lower-case if it's upper. Written primarily to allow the renaming of lower-case disk labels created by DSKNUM, REVFN may also be useful to convert filenames inadvertently saved in lower-case by MBASIC. File attributes (R/O, SYS, ARC, etc.) are maintained. For ZCPR3 only. Version 1.1 now properly handles filenames beginning with a slash.
ROYALOAK.LBR  A directory listing of files from Royal Oak RCP/M, Royal Oak, Mich. dated 8/91. Royal Oak went offline in September, 1991 due to equipment failure. However, RO Sysop Bob Clyne has painstakingly backed up the collection and sent them to DHN* RCP/M to continue to make them acessible to the CP/M community and we are in debt to Bob. Cataloging is underway by an informal group of interested parties, for eventual complete restoration to online access.
RS232TS2.     7168 reads the status byte from an RS232 control port and places it in ZCPR3 user register 8. Registers 0 through 7 contain either 1 or 0, depending on bits of the status byte. Optional wheel protec-tion and I/O port selection are set by patching well marked bytes in the first sector of the program. If RS232TST is wheel protected and if the wheel byte is reset, RS232TST returns an error code 6, making it effectively invisible to non-wheels.
SANYOTCP.LBR  Sanyo MBC-1200/1250 extended TCAP as used by Mike Finn on his Sanyo. Uploaded for the extended TCAP project.
SB180FIX.TXT  This txt file describes hardware mods to the SB180 original version to enable hardware hand-shaking. This is a copy of a note from Ke Ken Davidson from MicroMint.
SDD301P2.LBR  A Z-System conversion patch for SDD Version 3.01 as supplied with Plu*Perfect DosDisk(tm). Changes help and option syntax to Z-System conventions, allows SDD to respond to Z-System Named Directory specifications, obtains SDD's MaxDisk, MaxUser, Clear Screen, HiLight On, and HiLight Off data from ZCPR3 ENV and TCAP. A Z80-compatible CPU and ZCPR 3.3 (or later) equivalency are required. This version fixes a clear-screen bug. Sept. 4, 1990
SDIFF15.LBR   Displays file size in kbytes, records, and bytes. If two files specified, displays size difference. ZCPR3 aware.
SET13.LBR     A program for Epson QX-10 Z-System users to access features of the CPM B2.2x SETUP.COM program without having to drop out of Z- System. This program is written in BDS-C vZ2.0.
SETKPCLK.LBR  SETKPCLK sets Kenmore ZTIM-I clock on Kaypro computers. Interactive, menu-driven, continuously updates screen with your changes. Fast, easier to use than ZTIM-s programs. Written in Z80 assembler, com- piled with ZMAC and linked with ZML. Source included in Library. Uses ZSLIB and SYSLIB. ZDDOS specific.
SFXIO.Z80     
SFXIOAPP.ZZ0  Enhanced version of SYSLIB SFXIO module - byte-oriented file I/O. New entry point, FXA$OPEN, allows appending to an existing file.
SKUNK16.LBR   This is a dice game. This release features character graphics, an external luminary file and computer speed detection. Written in Microsoft Basic. Works out of the box under Z-System.
SLMT.LBR      Sets left margin and standard tab stops on daisywheel printers using the Diablo 1610 command set, including many popular Brother, Dynax, Comrex, Morrow and other models. Facilitates printing source code and other tabulated files with word processors like VDE which do not expand real tabs to spaces in nondocument files. Includes SLMT.CIM, which runs in high memory in Z33 environment, allowing VDE to restart with GO <fn.ft>. Fred Haines, 2-88
SLRHLP2.LBR   Standard Z-System help files for SLR's assemblers (Z80ASM, SLR180, and SLRMAC), linkers (SLRNK and SLRNK+), and librarian (SLRIB). Covers syntax, command line options, and assembler pseudo-ops.
SORTMK22.LBR  SORTMK is a fast Z80 (or equivalent) program that sorts small ASCII text files on several keys in ascending or descending order. File sizes can range up to about 20K bytes, depending on your TPA and the sort keys. Runs on Z80-based Z-System or "vanilla" CP/M; accepts Named Directory file names if ZCPR3 is present.
SPEEDUP1.LBR  SPEEDUP1 contains the source code for the Resident System Extension described in Issue #41 of The Computer Journal as an example of an application for LINKPRL mini-linker to generate Page Relocatable Files. SPEEDUP is a Disk Directory Cache program that significantly speeds accesses to disk files. Hal Bower
SWBIO10.LBR   This library contains source and object for the diskette track-swapping NZCOM virtual BIOS detailed in issue #55 of TCJ. Included is the disk directory initialization utility mentioned in that article. Roger Warren
SWDEMO15.LBR  YES, WE DO EVEN MORE WINDOWS! This file contains three demo programs and new product announcement of a fast, compact, and portable set of windowing library subroutines for CP/M, IBM PC, and any other micro/mini/mainframe computer. NO special terminals, hardware, or the like are needed. Imbedded TCAP for vanilla CP/M, Z-System TCAP are both referenced. Support for proposed new Z3 TCAP added (imbedded also).
SWTIME10.LBR  SWTIME10.LBR is a program to set a Dallas 1216E SMARTWATCH and then automattically set the Heartbeat watch program for the SB180 and SB180FX to the current time from the SMARTWATCH. From Znode #38.
SWX10.LBR     The original version of this XBIOS utility to support the Dallas Semiconductor SmartWatch did not include options to display the time or to display it continuously. This version adds those abilities, plus an option to allow setting the terminal time on Wyse and TeleVideo terminals that display the time in the status line. For XBIOS only.
SWZ10.LBR     This is a replacement for SWX and SWTIME if you run ZSDOS on your SB180. SWZ reads a SmartWatch chip and sets the system "heartbeat" clock via ZSDOS. It works under both the Micromint BIOS and XBIOS. In addition, SWZ will display the SmartWatch time once or continuously, and optionally allows setting the time on Wyse and TeleVideo terminals as it sets the system clock.
SZAP4A.LBR    SUPERZAP, which had already been extended to work with both CP/M-2.2 and CP/M-Plus, has now been extended to work with Z-System. This contribution comes from Gorm Helt-Hansen of Denmark.
T12.LBR       T12 is a modified version of ZLT12 that defaults to no paging, does not print a header at top of file, and sends all characters (including control characters) to the console. It is for using screen display files such as those terrific displays done by Rick Charnes, but T12 allows DU and DIR specs and squeezed, crunched, and LZH files in libraries. Thanks Rick!
TBMSBIOS.LBR  TBMSBIOS is a response to Advent Products' issue of vaporware support (as advirtised in TurboROM documentation files) for the MicroSphere ramdisk, which Advent considers to be "a piece of junk". I own a MicroSphere ramdisk which I like quite well, and have written a BIOS and a couple of tools to support it under TurboROM. All sources are included. Lindsay Haisley
TCAP-TVI.LBR  A group of VLIB4D-compatible TCAPS for my Televideo 965 terminal, but most of them will probably also work on 955's. Includes one for reverse video highlighting, one for 7-bit graphics, one for 8-bit graphics, one for the Wyse character set, and one for the IBM character set.
TCJNDX52.LBR  TCJ.MAG is a very basic WordStar-format line oriented text file index to The Computer Journal, including issues #22-#52. It can be rapidly searched using ZFIND. The alias TCJ (zfind [du:]tcj.mag $*) can be used to speed searches. Modify and/or expand the index to suit your own areas of interest.
TCLOCK.LBR    A clock displaying routine by Al Hawley also includes a BYE routine for ZSDOS/ZDDOS
TERMINAL.LBR  This is a collection of small files used to change the settings on a ZRT-80 terminal emulator card (Heath 19 type). The files can be modified quite easily to provide a painless way of changing the parameters via software.
TLINE12.LBR   TLINE is a tiny in-line editor module. Only backspace and delete are available for editing input line. Rejects other control characters, except carriage return and control-C. Carriage return ends edit, buffer contains null terminated string. ^C aborts editor, buffer contents not terminated. Version 1.2 has some code optimizations courtesy of Howard Goldstein.
TPATCH.LBR    This is a large collection of powerful extensions to Turbo Pascal versions 3.0 and 3.01a. Z-System functionality is added. Herbert Oppmann, Germany
TPDIR.LBR     DR1.PAS by Mike Yarus, 1985. DR1 is a directory program that can be included in Turbo Pascal code to display an alphabetized list of files and their size for any drive/user. Also displays various drive statistics - size, space left, etc.
TVI-HASH.LBR  Televideo terminals have no hashed block character for the extended TCAP, but this short alias for your ARUNZ ALIAS.CMD file will install one on terminals which allow font loading. That includes the TVI-965, but I don't know about earlier models.
TVI970-1.LBR  TCAP4D for the Televideo 970 Terminal. An "F" key programming program. A clear program to return to default settings when things get barfed! This TCAP uses the hash block for the solid block and the "*" for the hashed block. Tests OK for ZDE16, SCAN24, QTERM, type, and BOX. TCAP cannot fit both "RC:" (read current cursor position) and "CDO:" (cursor OFF) into space. "RC:" is required to run BOX sucessfully!
TXT2DB13.LBR  TXT2DB13 translates text files into DB statements suitable for inclusion in Assembly source files as terminated strings. Such strings are very useful for menus, help screens, and other screen displays. V1.3 fixes a few bugs, increases the range of synthetic labels generated, and provides configuration of the FormFeed character. The new CFG file uses the new functions in ZCNFG21, which is included and must be used to configure this version.
TXT55.LBR     This is an update to a classic CP/M utility which lets you turn readable text into runnable programs. The library also contains an article which will appear in the premier issue of Eight Bits And Change, a national computer and humor magalog. For the Z-System enthusiast, this library also contains some pretty interesting arunz aliases which may be used with txt. Enjoy!
U3-104.LBR    U3 is a CP/M-Plus utility for recovering erased files and for changing the user area of a file. It accepts ambiguous filespecs and works with sector sizes of 128, 256, 512, 1024 bytes. It will not work with earlier versions of CP/M.
UNJUST13.LBR  Tried to edit a document with WordStar that is justified with ASCII spaces? UNJUST replaces multiple white-space character strings in text files with a single space, (two spaces after periods), removing all soft spaces and tab characters, and all white- space at the beginning and end of lines. Preserves create date stamps under ZSDOS. Version 1.3 corrects an occasional bug in renaming the output file. ZCPR3 only.
UNLZHCPM.ZIP  Decodes CP/M LZH encode files on MSDOS machines. Optional 'type to screen' mode.
UNZIP18.LBR   UNZIP dissolves MS-DOS ZIP files. Accepts DU and DIR specs for ZIP file and as destination for extracted files. Output filenames are supported. Can be aborted with ^C without leaving partial files on disk. Version 1.6 has much faster disk I/O and no longer checks CRC's when listing names of files not being extracted. Version 1.8 corrects a few bugs. -- Howard Goldstein, 4/16/92
UPGRADE.LBR   This is an article on upgrading a system from 64K chips to 256k. It should be useable on any 8 bit computer. Figure.1 gives a schematic of the circuit needed to support the memory upgrade.
VRSLIB10.LBR  Jim Leth's 'version' management program - a set of utilities and a 'concept' using ARUNZ , VMENU, and NULU. Looks great - creativity with Z.
WS4-MY.LBR    Overlay for WordStar CP/M Release 4 for use under the MYZ80 CP/M emulator on IBM-AT compatible machines. After your WordStar receives a copy of this overlay, several video attributes will be used so that you can see the effect of various printer code toggles, such as ^PB (boldfacing), ^PS (underlining), etc. Text within marked blocks is in reverse video.
WS4KPD.ARK    The Kaypro keypad and cursor keys can be reprogrammed for any WordStar commands. Here are two forms of an overlay (8080 and Z80) for WordStar 4.0 that will set those keys to your own functions when WS is run, and reset them to their original values when exiting WS. Also included -documentation for the overlay and a brief tutorial on how the programmable keys work.
WS4PAT2.LBR   No description available.
WSZDS10F.LBR  A patch for WS 4 which preserves the ZSDOS 'Created' file stamp. Fixes a potential problem of a rarely used configuration for P2DOS and DateStamper. HEX files are included here for use of MORPAT or EXTRA (If you have already used part of EXTRA you must use the assembly file to create the patch). Biff Bueffel/Dave Chapman
X10-S34.LBR   X10.COM is a program to control the X10 Powerhouse CP-290 Computer Serial Interface. Allows access to the power of the CP-290 and the X10 home control system which controls AC power in your home through the use of electronic modules(such as Radio Shack Plug'n Power) which send commands over existing wiring. Uses ZCPR3 features even under 'plain vanilla' CPM. Extended TCAP required of Z3 users. See X10-C34 for COM files. 08/26/92
XBNOTE.LBR    These are notes on integrating NZCOM with SB180 XBIOS. To date I have gotten the DateStamper BSX to work with NZCOM. Al Hathway.
XBNOTE11.LBR  More notes on integrating NZCOM with the Micromint SB180 XBIOS. Al Hathway.
XDRO10.LBR    An extended replacement for ZCPR3's DRO, SRO, and SRW, sets disk drives read only or resets them to read write. The ZSDOS "sustain" flag is handled correctly. Checks maximum disk byte and drive vector. Wheel protected. Also runs under vanilla CP/M.
XTAIL11.LBR   A ZCPR3 utility that displays the command tail as parsed by the command processor. Both the default and alternate (secondary) file control blocks are displayed as a hexadecimal dump and in ASCII, as i the complete tail in the default DMA buffer. This program can be useful for anyone exploring programming in the ZCPR3 environment. I found it invaluable when I wrote it several years ago.
XXI10.LBR     Does anybody really program in Extended Intel mnemonics anymore? Well, I do, so here's XXI to convert assembly source code written in Zilog Z80 mnemonics to Extended Intel mnemonics. Extended Intel is used by SLRMAC, and by Digital Research's MAC and RMAC with Z80.LIB. Opcodes for registers X and Y that include displacements are flagged, but not translated. ZCPR3 is required.
YASBEC10.LBR  A collection of text files gathered from Socrates Z-Node 32 about the YASBEC semi- populated computer including source and description of the board, parts lists, and vendors for the parts you must supply to finish the board. This library is current through 09/22/91 and replaces YASBEC.LBR. Mike Finn DHN*/PACS CP/M SIG.
YASMEM10.LBR  YASBEC 128MEM4 B/P Bios memory test utility performs memory tests on the static RAM chips installed on the YASMEM board and displays errors. Also useful for determining the minimum number of wait states required for reliable memory access. Configured for use with 128MEM4 PAL but may be reconfigured for use with other memory PALs. See YASMEM10.HZP.
Z-4-AT11.ARC  This is a primer on Simeon Cran's MYZ80 emulator for AT-class computers and on bringing up Z-System and using Z-System tools under it. This release incorporates many suggestions made by Howard Goldstein. It may be browsed with the Z-System HELP utility - Lee Bradley 08/24/92
Z3BAS.LBR     Z3BAS.LIB - a collection of routines written in MBASIC which may be used in MBASIC programs to access Z System environment data. Currently, Z3 environment address calculation, tcap string building, cursor motion macro interpreter, quiet and wheel byte etc. status implemented. By using BASCOM and L80 and a tiny Z3HDR.REL file, MBASIC programs can become Z3 utilities. Lee Bradley, 06/20/90.
Z3HELP02.LST  
Z3HELP02.LZT  Update to last fall's list of Z3HELP files. Includes updates through Z3HELP38.LBR. Use to determine which files you're missing or need to update. 4/1/91, Bill Tishey
Z3HELP37.LBR  New files and updates to Bill TIshey's Z3 help system. 2/24/91 -wat
Z3HELP43.LBR  The first of four recent update LBRs to the Z3HELP system. Over 100 files have been modified and 500k added to the last release (4/18/91) The new system totals 571 files in 1,700k. -Bill T.
Z3HELP44.LBR  Update 44 to Bill Tishey's Z-system help files.
Z3HLP43B.LBR  Part 2 of Z3HELP43. This update to the Z3HELP system is a major one and had to be split into 4 parts. Over 100 files were modified/ added, bringing the system to 1700k (over 500k more than the last release). 11/22/91, Bill T.
Z3HLP43C.LBR  Part 3 of Z3HELP43. This update to the Z3HELP system is a major one and had to be split into 4 parts. Over 100 files were modified/ added, bringing the system to 1700k (over 500k more than the last release). 11/22/91, Bill T.
Z3HLP43D.LBR  Part 4 of Z3HELP43. This update to the Z3HELP system is a major one and had to be split into 4 parts. Over 100 files were modified/ added, bringing the system to 1700k (over 500k more than the last release). 11/22/91, Bill T.
Z3TCAP27.LBR  Noticed the last version of Z3TCAP wasn't here...here it is.
Z8020.LBR     Joe Wright's version of Z80.LIB, macros that allow 8080 only assemblers like MAC and RMAC to produce Z80 code.
Z80LIB.LBR    Z80.LIB is a set of macros that allows the use of "extended Intel mnemonics on any 8080 macro assembler. Also in the library are a couple of WordStar doc files equating Zilog and extended Intel mnemonics, one brief, the other with opcode explanations. This was uploaded for Rick Charnes.
ZAPN01.LBR    An application note by David McCord on using and programming shells under ZCPR3. Brief and a little dated, but it might still be of interest. This was uploaded primarily for Pete Pardoe.
ZCASM15.OBJ   ZCASM15.C, distributed with the BDS C 2.0 package, will NOT compile properly under BDS C vs. 1.6 and 2.0. This is the compiled version, using BDS C vs. 1.5a which works as advertised and converts .ASM files with Zilog mnemonics to files suitable for assembly with M80/ L80 into .CRL files for use with BDS C. Users should determine that the CRL format required by newer versions of the BDS linkers remains the same.
ZCSRC.LBR     ZCSRC released February 1992 by Richard Brewster contains the C source code for ZCOPY21, plus the IO library in 8080 assembler, as well as the COM and DOC files. I hope that an eager BDS Z programmer might like to make ZCOPY into a Z System utility. I have not released the source until now. I am also currently releasing the source to ZGREP11 as ZGSRC.LBR.
ZD-XB11.LBR   XBIOS 1.2 won't run on my SB180, so I couldn't load ZSDOS or ZDDOS. I finally kludged my way through a manual installation. Included here is a text file explaining one person's solution to the problem, and new SYS.ENV and Z3BASE files. Thanks, Jay, for the help.
ZD16OZ8D.LBR  ZDE v1.6 patch to allow ZDE to maintain create date/time stamps while using Z80DOS v2.4.
ZDATESET.LBR  Dbase II CMD file to read a clock via the ZSDOS function 98 and set the Dbase DATE(). Uses an assembly language routine to accomplish this. Make this the first CMD requested in your program or incorporate it into your main CMD file. The DBASE date setting routine is skipped when you do 'DBASE PROGRAM' so ZDBDATE will not work to set the date in this circumstance. Biff Bueffel 07/07/91
ZDBDAT11.LBR  Overlay for dBase II versions 2.41 and 2.43* that will load the date into dBase using the ZSDOS GET-TIME function. If the clock is not functioning, the routine will default to the standard dBase date routine. Version 1.1 corrects a problem when used with NEWBASE.
ZDE-DOCS.LBR  The complete documentation for ZDE in one place - the main doc file, table of contents, quick reference and what's new from ZDE10, as well as the new updates from ZDE13 and ZDE16. Also contains the fix to ZDE16 for those BIOS's that modify the AF' register.
ZDE-PRN2.LBR  Same as ZDE-PRN1.LBR except with addition of two ZDP files: one for Okidata 92/182/etc. and the other for Juki 6100/Kaypro Daisy Wheel printers.
ZDE16.LBR     Z System Display Editor, version 1.6. A small, fast, powerful WordStar-type text editor for all CP/M and compatible systems with the Z80 processor. In some ways superior to its big brother VDE, this version of ZDE adds fully functional Auto-Indent capabilities, Proportional Formatting, Auto- Recall of last response to prompts, Global Find/Replace, Return to Previous Position (^QP) and more to what many felt was already the best editor available for CP/M. ---
ZDEMACRO.LBR  ZDE macro keys. Most of them are derived or directly from the SAMPKEY files found in ZDE16.LBR. But the one macro key that prompts the distribution of this .LBR is a macro which both softens a hard-carriaged paragraph *AND* then reformats the paragraph. SAMPKEY had a Soften key, but it did not reformat the file -- you had to use another macro key to reformat the file. For ZDE, install with the command ZDENSTAL ZDE ZDEMACRO.ZDK.
ZDT12.LBR     ZDT is the Z-System Day Timer/Personal Scheduler, a daily planning calendar based on ZDB. Requires ZCPR 3.0 or higher, VLIB4+ and extended TCAP. Full data entry and editing, search, and printing capabilities. Help and configuration files included.
ZERR16C.LBR   ZERRLSH, Version 1.6c October 31, 1992 Rob Friefeld This update of the ZCPR3.3 error handler incorporates changes in the LSH history correcting mechanism. Four versions are included: Since version 1.6b, further improvements in Fixed Log LSH version.
ZF11.LBR      Version 1.1 of the ZFILER shell (at last). This version includes a language overlay structure that makes it easy to change the screen displays to adapt them to foreign languages or users' preferences -- Jay Sage
ZF11SRC.LBR   This is the source code to version 1.1 of ZFILER. I hope that someone will complete and improve the CFG file and that someone will add code (with assembly option) for a version of ZFILER that acts as a ZCPR2-style shell (adding a command to reinvoke itself at the end of any other commands it pushed into the command line). -- Jay Sage
ZFILEB44.LST  
ZFILEB44.LZT  Brief listing of Z-system files giving version number and a few stats See the companion file, ZFILEV13.LZT, for a verbose version.
ZFILEV13.LST  
ZFILEV13.LZT  Verbose listing of Z-system files giving latest version number, stats and a 3 line description. See the companion file, ZFILEB44.LZT for the brief version.
ZFIND15.LBR   ZCPR3 string search utility very quickly finds ASCII strings in text files using the Boyer-Moore string search algorithm. Similar to Irv Hoff's FIND.COM, but MUCH faster. Matched string can be displayed in either the line or the delimited block in which it was found and the output can be written or appended to a file. Fast lookups in magazine article index or MAST.CAT files. Fixed bug causing very large files to be searched more than once. See ZFIND15.HZP. U/L by Terry Hazen, 09/13/92
ZGOLF22.LBR   A solitaire card game for ZCPR3 systems with an extended TCAP. Version 2.0 used VLIB graphics for screen displays and fixed some bugs. Version 2.1 added some convenience features and a great WIN screen. Version 2.2 adds some alternate commands and a few tuneups.
ZGSRC.LBR     ZGSRC released February 1992 by Richard Brewster contains the C source code for ZGREP11, plus the IO library in 8080 assembler, as well as the COM and DOC files. I hope that an eager BDS Z programmer might like to make ZGREP into a Z System utility. I have not released the source until now. I am also currently releasing the source to ZCOPY21 as ZCSRC.LBR.
ZHLPNCF1.LBR  No description available.
ZHLPSUB2.LBR  Bill Tishey's Z3HELP series is a terrific colletion of up-to-date Z-System help files. ZHLPSUB2.LBR are .SUB files to make mass- updating original Z3HELP-x.LBR files easy. Version 2 adds a library compression step using Michael Carson's Z system standalone CL, and W. included.
ZHLPSUBS.LBR  ZHLPSUBS.LBR are .SUB files to make mass updating original Z3HELP-x.L easy. Bill's periodic updates (start with v04, up to v20 at this date) are extracted in order with LBREXT so the last updates over-write prior ones, to the DU: of choice. Then these last versions are written back to the Z3HELP- x.LBR's with LPUT. Modify DU: for your system (allow 1.5 Mb), an can use for future releases. B. Dean 3/10
ZIPDIR13.LBR  CP/M program to list the directory of .ZIP files created by Phil Katz's MS-DOS utility, PKZIP. The listing shows each member filename along with it's compressed and uncompressed lengths, compression method and ratio, time, date, and CRC value, as well as totals for the above. Ready to go .COM file and Z80 source included. Good for RCP/M use, now requires no re-assembly or patching. Version 1.3 fixes some bugs.
ZIPP.LBR      Many public domain utilities exist which can execute the concatenation of files (i.e. join them end to end). The program ZIPP was written to join up to seven ASCII files in a side to side or column sense. This is useful in data analysis, spreadsheets, and reports.
ZLT15.LBR     ZLT (Z-system Library Typer) will type crunched, squeezed, LZH-encoded, or normal text files or library members. Version 1.5 fixes a bug in the option parser, has an improved built-in help message, and no longer restricts non-wheel ussers to files in the current directory. Howard Goldstein, 9/12/91
ZMAC.DOC      This bulletin describes the new Z-system Assembler, Linker, and Library Manager (ZMAC/ZML/ZMLIB) introduced at the Trenton Computer Festival. Includes reproductions of the slides, technical presentation notes, and Assembly Language programming references.
ZMAN-NEW.LBR  This is the Z-System Users Guide published by Echelon in 1986. It's in somewhat rough form (CHAP8.NEW lacks indexing marks and is not right-justified like the others) and contains some obsolete information, but it's still the best user-oriented guidance on Z-System available. Aside from this FOR, all files are exactly as I submitted them to Echelon, right down to the ancient version of UNCR.... Bruce Morgen
ZML16.PAT     Patch for ZML16 corrects inappropriate error abort when making Type 3 .COM files, and another obscure and inappropriate error abort. A must for owners of ZML V1.6.
ZMSAVE11.LBR  This is a utility for use with the ZMATE text editor. In case of premature or unintended exit from ZMATE, this program will try to recover the text that was left in all 11 edit buffers and write the data to files. This is a very old program that I wrote over four years ago for use with PMATE. I have made a couple of small changes, but I can now see quite a few ways in which it could be enhanced further. Jay Sage, May 23, 1990
ZNODES67.LST  
ZNODES67.LZT  Updated list of Z-Nodes as of November 16, 1992. -- Jay Sage
ZP17A.LBR     ZCPR3 screen-oriented file/disk/memory record patcher uses the ZPATCH command set and requires a VLIB4D+ extended Z3TCAP. One- record cache can be exchanged with a file, disk, or memory record. 'HP' RPN integer calculator may be called up at any time for hex, decimal, binary or character mode calculations. Version 17a fixes some cache mode bugs, an edit mode screen refresh bug and corrects the return references in the HP help files. See ZP17.HZP.
ZPATCH13.LBR  zpatch update see for file! Command editor works like Edfile but for ZCPR
ZPATH.LBR     The source code for Zpath haas now been entered into the public domain.
ZPF2ASC.LBR   Converts Perfect filer database files to ASCII comma-delimited format. A Z80 assembler version (4 times as fast) of the prior PF2ASCII utility by Joe Mortensen. Source code included.
ZPLOT10A.LBR  Plotting utility for dot matrix printers. Includes Z280-specific version as well as regular Z80.
ZPM3.LBR      ZPM3 by Simeon Cran. A replacement BDOS for Z80 CP/M PLUS (and Z3PLUS) machines. Implements bug fixes and performance enhancements over the DRI BDOS, as well as built-in command history, with no increase in size. Install by relinking your BIOS, or by running a supplied program.
ZPM3N08.ARK   This is release 8 of the new Z80 BDOS for CP/M Plus from Simeon Cran. ZPM3 adds new features, fixes bugs, and runs faster and smoother than DR's BDOS. Included are utilities to aid installation in an existing BIOS. Uploaded 10/12/92 by Randy Winchester
ZQUIRK.DOC    
ZQUIRK.DZC    Describes a pitfall (pratfall is more like it) in the use of Z system get-poke-go aliases when through user error or idiocy the file sought by the GET command can't be found. Warns of possible serious conse- quences. Suggests that future RCP's might include a fix. Not a big deal.
ZREMOT03.INS  Assembly and linking instructions for ZREMOTE. To be used with the source files in ZREMOT03.LBR.
ZREMOT03.LBR  Here is a skeletal implementation of the BYE protocol stripped down to bare essentials and implemented as a true RSX (Pluperfect standards). The package comprises a collection of modules which are to be assembled separately and then linked. ZMAC/ZML or equivalents like SLR or M80/L80 may also be used. This package works for tying two computers together and transfering files (using KMD, ZMD, etc.) in the same way as BYE.
ZRUN.ARC      Run CP/M on MS-DOS.
ZS13.LBR      ZSWEEP 1.3 corrects some outstanding bugs and incompatibilities with NZCOM/BGii (thanks again to Bruce Morgen). No new features have been added at this time. Full source is included. U/L by Pete Pardoe, 09/11/91
ZSDHLP2.LBR   A group of help files for programming under ZSDOS. Includes all system function calls; standard BIOS function calls; and charts of the various structures, including the file control blocks, disk parameter headers, date specifications, etc. Release 2 corrects a couple or errors in function descriptions.
ZSDOSPM.AD    
ZSDOSPM.AZ    Advertisement for the ZSDOS Programmer's Manual. This is the manual ZSDOS programmers have been waiting for. Complete description of the ZSDOS interface includes many useful tables and diagrams. Also contains lots of previously unavailable general information about CP/M. The manual is printed in the convenient 8.5 x 5.5 inch form factor using multiple proportional fonts and line graphics wherever possible for clarity and attractiveness. Available NOW!
ZSLSRC36.LBR  Full source code and utility files for ZSLIB 3.6. Relocatable libraries and documentation are available as ZSLIB36.LBR.
ZTIME14.LBR   No description available.
ZTYPE11.LBR   Text file display utility for ".ZIP" files. .ZIP files are libraries of compressed subfiles created with Phil Katz's PKZIP file archiving program for MSDOS. Ztype allows CP/M users to view the contents of such files without first extracting them. ZTYPE works with all CP/M 2.2, 3.0, and compatible systems having at least 45.5k of TPA. BDS C source included. Version 1.1 corrects a bug which caused ZTYPE to fail under certain conditions (see ZT.C). 04/27/91 by Carson W.
ZXD162.LBR    The source code for Zxd162 has now been entered into the public domain.
ZXD166.Z80    
ZXD166.ZZ0    Latest version of the ZSDOS Directory Lister. Recognizes pending ZSDOS2, DosDisk, ZSDOS, DataStamper, CP/M+ information. Displays file sizes up to 999,999 Kb for LARGE drives. Hal Bower
ZZAP21.LBR    ZCPR3 program to work directly on the disk itself. This is a minor update to ZZAP 2.0 to check for the existence of a TCAP entry and to verify that the extended TCAP definition for Clear to End of Screen is present. If either check fails, the program will abort. U/L by Howard Schwartz
