                              New Products
                          by Phil Garey (OKUG)

Boy Have I got one for you! That is if your interests include either a
DVORAK keyboard layout or an IBM type keyboard with all those function
keys and separate cursor and numeric keypads.  I bought Corvatek's
Key-Up Interface and at the same time, the Keytronic KB 5151
Professional Series Key-up enables you to use an IBM type keyboard on a
Kaypro.  This gives you the advantage of a professional-feel keyboard
with the 10 function keys and two separate keypads.  These can all be
programmed with up to 250 bytes of memory, in pieces as small as 4 K.

Suppose you want to reprogram Control A to write "Phil Garey,
Olympia, WA".  Programming is as simple as this:
Press the ALT, CTR, Shift keys simultaneously;
Then press F1;
Then press Ctrl A;
Then type in "Phil Garey, Olympia, WA;"
Then press the ALT, CTR, Shift Keys again.
Now anytime you press Ctrl A, "Phil Garey, Olympia, WA," will appear.

Getting clear of the definition is just as easy.  Just reverse the
process.

Other neat features you find are "Page-up," and "Page-down" keys, which
give you a page scroll either way, a Home Key which takes you back a
word and the End Key, which moves the cursor to the end of the next
word.  There are others, too.

The best feature for me is that it solves a two year search for a DVORAK
keyboard for my Kaypro 10.  The software fixes provided by Xtrakey,
Smartkey, etc., were not satisfactory, for a number of reasons, all
involving lack of full use of the Kaypro keyboard.  With the Key-Up
Interface, I was able to buy the KeyTronic DVORAK Layout Keyboard, and
use it directly, with all the key caps in the proper places.  The Key-Up
has a toggle switch in it that automatically switches to Dvorak if you
want to use a standard "QWERTY" keyboard but change the action to
DVORAK.  Since there was no difference in price, I just got the DVORAK
Keyboard.  Which brings up price.  The Key-Up Interface sells for $129,
which ain't cheap, but it's available and it works.  I bought the
Keytronic KB 5151 Keyboard at $159.  You can get other IBM type
keyboards for less money.  I've seen them as low as $75.  Corvatek, 1100
N.W. Van Buren St., Corvallis, OR 97330 (503) 752-4833.  Rick Watts, the
President, has provided outstanding backup service and prompt delivery.
In fact, after I had called about a problem, which I later found was my
computer, Rick called me twice to make certain that everything was
working.  Nice to know there are humans out there in the electronic
world.  He has a ad in Computer Shopper this month.

NEW by Phil Garey (OKUG)

For all you DVORAK Keyboard fans out there, you can obtain a free sample
copy of the Newsletter, DVORAK DEVELOPMENTS, by sending a self
addressed, self stamped (39 cents), 6" X 9" envelope to Dvorak
Developments, P.O. Box 717, Arcata, CA 95521. The current issue has an
interesting article about carpal tunnel syndrome, caused by repetitive
strain injuries (RSI).  Seems that the light touch of electronic
keyboards may be a contributing factor here.  But most of the
information is about DVORAK keyboard developments and applications.

...ONKUG, Newsdiskette to Kaypro Users Groups, Volume 2, Number 2.
