KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM RUNNING
   Copyright 1987 by Barry A. Cole of WLAKUG

The top priority of most Kaypro users is reliability.  It is
absolutely no fun to re-enter the work of several hours or
days.  A close second is working economically.  This
includes times when something goes wrong.  In this article,
I will show you some simple steps to keep your machine
running well, and what to do in cases of failure to correct
the problem with minimum expense and time lost.

Kaypro computers are built very sturdily and are well
designed.  If some care is taken, they are quite reliable.
Failures most often occur due to external causes such as bad
power, wrong switch settings on a modem or printer, or bad
cables.  Another common failure is mechanical wear or mis-
handling of disk drives or media.  Often a failure is non-
existent; it is caused by a mis-interpretation of what has
happened(operator error).

If you are having a difficulty, here are some rules that
will save frustration and money:
  1)  Confirm that you have a problem:  are you trying to do
something that the software doesn't support?
  2)  Always check the simple things first:  Is it plugged
in?
  3)  Get as much information as possible about the
circumstances of the failure and write them down.  What were
you doing?  Is the power light on?  Do you hear disks
spinning?
  4)  Is the problem repeatable?
  5)  Can you fix the problem by using a different boot
disk, program disk, or data disk?  (You may have wiped out
one disk.)
  6)  Try to isolate the problem to one component.  First
between hardware, software, or installation.  Then, to a
specific component such as B: disk drive.  A good test for
disk drive allignment is to format and copy a disk from A:
to B:.  Now Boot from B: diskette in A: and attempt to copy
files on itself.  Properly alligned drives should show no
interchange errors.  If you are having trouble printing from
a word processor, do a control P from CP/M.
  7)  If you have no signs of life, try another outlet in
your house.  Also, check the fuse in the back of your
Kaypro.

The best way to avoid problems is simple preventive
maintainence.  Keep your programs and data backed up.  Be
very careful where you store your diskettes.  I do not allow
a magnet in the same room.  Disks are labeled and numbered
always with a felt tip marker.  I always replace the
cardboard protectors in my disk drives before moving the
Kaypro.  I leave the doors open when not in use.  I run a
head cleaner through the drives about every four months or
sooner if I see disk errors.  I do not detach either power
or keyboard cables, ever.  Just wind the power cord around
the back stakes.  Fold the keyboard up and closed without
removing the coil cord.  You will not tarnish or break the
flimsy contacts on the modular phone connector if they are
always in the socket.  You will also always arrive to find
you have all cables.

If you do not get the initial message on your screen, but
you have the power light on, this is the procedure:
  1)  UNPLUG your computer from the wall!
  2)  Open the computer by removing 2 flat head screws from
the top and 4 round head screws from each side.  Use a large
blade phillips screwdriver for this.
  3)  Lift the top off and place it out of the way.
  4)  On the top board, you will find many components in
sockets(plastic stilts with metal contacts).  These tend to
loosen and occasionally corrode and discolor.  Press down on
each in sucession.  You may hear them click down into place.
  5)  Check to make sure connectors are on tightly on this
top board, the back of the board underneath the screen, and
the back of the disk drives.
  6)  Replace the cover and screws(2 flat ones on top).
  7)  Plug the computer in and try again.
This is the most common way to save $100 and lots of agony.

Finally, get help before you get youself in too deep.  If
simple things do not solve the problem, don't keep wiping
out disks or repeating the same unsucessful actions.  Many
clubs have members with repair expertise.  Seek them out.
